---
title: U.S. Book Bans 1600-1700
layout: about
permalink: /1600-1700.html
credits: false
---
## U.S. Book Bans 1600-1700 ##

<sup> Cooper, Elizabeth, Riya, Eric </sup>

Book bannings in the United States from the period 1600-1700 were characterized by conflict between traditional social authorities and literary dissenters. In contrast to the modern struggle between boards of education, parents, students, and government officials, book bannings in this period were primarily concerned within the public realm rather than the educational one. Banned literature challenged existing religious, moral, legal, and social frameworks. Bannings of the time represent a threat by the burgeoning press and developing intellectual ideas to the traditional religious authorities such as the Massachusetts Bay Colony. Throughout the colonies, the ideas represented by the banned books presented an eminent threat to the social hierarchy, resulting in fierce (albeit sporadic) repression of nonconformist literature. More than simple fictional narrative to the presiding religious authorities, the ideas of Books like New English Canaan and Meritorious Price of Our Redemption represented sharp critiques of New English governance and condoned alternative moral and social frameworks. Thus, book bannings at the time can be characterized as an attempt by authorities of the period to resist the spread of new, challenging ideas to the existing social order. 

In the 17th century, before the United States even existed as a country, early colonial governments banned books to enforce religious and social conformity. What historians identify as the first book ban took place in 1637 in what is now Quincy, Massachusetts when Thomas Morton’s New English Canaan was outlawed by Puritan leaders in the Massachusetts Bay Colony. Morton’s work, originally published in Amsterdam, was sharply critical of Puritan society. He wrote about their harsh treatment of Indigenous peoples and strict moral and religious norms of the colony. Colonial authorities saw his critiques as heretical and subversive and banned the text in their settlements. Another early case took place in 1650 when William Pynchon’s pamphlet The Meritorious Price of Our Redemption was denounced by Puritan leaders in Boston and publicly burned because its religious ideas conflicted with established Puritan Calvinist doctrine. This act is one of the earliest book burnings in colonial North America. This reflects how book suppression during this period was closely tied to theocratic control over what ideas were acceptable in public discourse. 

This 17th-century pattern of prohibition finds a clear successor in modern book challenges. While early colonial suppressions like those of Morton and Pynchon sought to maintain theocratic control over the general public, contemporary efforts have shifted their focus to the educational aspect challenging the curricula and libraries today. Although bannings are more so focused on the educational aspects today, we can view many reasons for book bannings in the religious lens. Just as the Massachusetts Bay Colony viewed nonconformist literature as a “moral contagion” threatening their social order, modern challengers often view LGBTQ+ literature as a fundamental subversion of social and biological frameworks with regions and cases that have successfully challenged these literatures. A contemporary parallel to the burning of The Meritorious Price of Our Redemption is the recent legal and administrative targeting of LGBTQ+ books. For instance, there was the 2025 lawsuit Mahmoud v. Taylor argues that teaching with LGBTQ+ books in elementary curricula violates the First Amendment rights of religious parents. Much like the Puritan authorities who saw Morton’s critiques as heretical and subversive, the plaintiffs in Mahmoud framed the exposure to diverse gender and sexual identities as a form of “spiritual harm” or “coercion” that undermines the religious stewardship of the family.

{% include feature/image.html objectid="coll061" width="75" %}
