---
title: Banning Due to Political Content
layout: about
permalink: /political.html
credits: false
---
## Banning Due to Political Content ##

<sup> Youyi, Sabella, Ashlyn, Rachel </sup>

### Defining Political Content in Literature

Political content in banned books often refers to ideas, themes or narratives that engage with systems of power, governance or civic life. Political content in literature has a long history rooted in periods of social conflict, government control, and political tensions. During the 18th and 19th centuries, political writing surfaced alongside revolutions and reform movements, as texts challenged monarchy, slavery, and colonialism. In the 20th century, this tradition intensified as global conflicts and authoritarian regimes shaped literary production. This can include explicit critiques of dictatorship, examination of democracy, portrayals of revolution or ideological positions such as anti-communist or anti-fascism. Moreover, political content does not always take the form of direct argument; it may be conveyed through dystopian societies or allegories or characters who struggle through an unjust system. For example, novels like *1984* portray totalitarian surveillance states, whereas others may explore censorship, propaganda, or suppression of dissent.

### Evolution of Political Storytelling

*1984* by George Orwell emerged from the aftermath of World War II, reflecting the widespread fears surrounding totalitarian regimes, mass surveillance, and the state's manipulation of the truth. As political conditions changed, later authors adapted these concerns to new historical movements. By the late 20th and early 21st centuries, political dystopias increasingly focused on how authoritarian control emphasizes new forms, such as economic inequality and media influence, rather than relying solely on surveillance. The evolution in political storytelling demonstrates how concerns about power and freedom persist across time, even as literary depictions of control adapt to reflect changing political climates. As a whole, political content invites the reader to think and critique critically about how power operates and how political systems shape individual freedom in society.

### Case Study: *The Kite Runner*

Books like *The Kite Runner* (2003) by Khaled Hosseini exemplify how books can be banned in the United States for political content not directly centered in the United States. *The Kite Runner* is set in the 1970s, in Afghanistan, and focuses on a boy named Amir. Much of the book's conflict revolves around the actions and violence of the Taliban. In many education settings, *The Kite Runner* has been used to contextualize Afghan history and abuse of power ([Gomez](bannedbooksweek.org/banned-spotlight-the-kite-runner/)). However, the book was banned in several states for these controversial topics, and it was removed from many school curriculums. Again, *The Kite Runner* does not take place in the United States, yet it was deemed inappropriate for students due to its political themes. It criticizes the actions of certain Afghan authorities, which might have been perceived as dangerous; authorities in the United States might have believed that American authors would also take the opportunity to portray the actions of the United States military in a negative light, especially because *The Kite Runner* was published during the War in Afghanistan. Though the "true" reasons for its banning vary across locations, it is clear that political content is often the subject of book bans due to their perceived potential to agitate society.

### Contemporary Political Censorship

Political content has always been a central reason for book banning, as authorities have often thought to suppress ideas that challenge existing political structures. From the anti-communist censorship of the Cold War to the banning of literature that condemns dictatorship or racial injustice, political themes have consistently made books vulnerable to restriction. Since 2025, the USA has seen books banned at a rapid rate to progress. Most notably, Florida has banned 2,304 books in that year alone ([PEN America](pen.org/report/banned-usa-growing-movement-to-censor-books-in-schools/)), and within our Banned Books Archive, 26 of the 87 banned books occurred in Florida. These bans censored books with recurring themes including LGBTQ+ content, sexual content, and race. These bans are often framed as protecting children and removing content not suitable for a learning environment. As such, a majority of these bans occurred in schools, depriving students of reading materials on specific topics.

One notable book banned throughout multiple schools in Florida is *The Hunger Games* series, a dystopian society with an authoritarian government. Anti-establishment and promoting rebellion were seen as one of the core themes through the series as the main character, Katniss, continuously defies the Capitol's rules. As such, many schools and governing bodies viewed the series as anti-government and thus banned them. Recent patterns of censorship reflect broader political motivations rather than isolated concerns about age-appropriatedness. As PEN America explains, "The book bans sweeping the country are not a reflection of parents' individual choices, but rather the result of organized political pressure campaigns seeking to impose their views on others" ([PEN America](pen.org/report/banned-usa-growing-movement-to-censor-books-in-schools/)). This suggests that modern book bans are not about protecting students but controlling what political ideas are allowed in public education. When such books are removed from shelves, it reflects ongoing tensions on whose narratives and critiques of power are considered acceptable in schools and therefore our larger society.

### Conclusion

In conclusion, political content has always been, and likely always will be a key point of discourse and challenge for the literary censorship community. George Orwell famously advocated for free expression, stating "If liberty means anything at all, it means the right to tell people what they do not want to hear", which in the context of book banning, is a reminder that allowing public opinions or authorities to restrict books leads to a stifled society and narrow ideology.
